Implement @join_app (#1860)
Parsl/parsl: docs/userguide/joins.rst

Join Apps
=========

Join apps allow a workflow to asynchronously launch other apps and incorporate
them into the task graph. They can be specified using the `@join_app` decorator.

Although apps can be launched from within a `@python_app` in any `ThreadPoolExecutor`,
the `Future` objects for those launched apps cannot easily be used outside of the
launching `@python_app`.

Motivating example
------------------

> Here is a motivating example which shows ways in which launching apps from inside a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a motivating example that shows ways in which launching apps from inside a
```

`@python_app` is insufficient.

Consider a workflow where there are "sensors" which must be processed and assembled
into "patches", and then all patches assembled into a "mosaic".

> The list of which sensors must be assembled into which "patches" is not know ahead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of which sensors must be assembled into which "patches" is not known ahead
```

of time and is expensive to compute.

> There are many patches which must all be processed in this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many patches that must all be processed in this way.
```

    future.patch = patch
    sensor_list_futures.append(future)

  post_process_futures=[]
  for future in concurrent.futures.as_completed(sensor_list_futures):
    patch = future.patch
    sensor_futures = []
    for sensor in future.result()
      sensor_futures.append(process_sensor(sensor)
    assembled_future = assemble_sensors(*sensor_futures)
    post_process_futures.append(post_process(assembled_future))

  mosaic_future = make_mosaic(*post_process_futures)
  mosaic_future.result()

Weaknesses
""""""""""

There is some loss of the sense of data flow expressed in syntax, obscured by
the implementation of a rudimentary in-workflow task scheduler that only knows about sensor list futures.

This is *still* blocking on the second for loop needing to complete before later apps can be launched,
and that for loop only completes when all sensor lists have been generated - this is earlier than
in previous examples, but there is still blocking there.

This impedes compositionality: this code could not be placed into a function and (for example) run
inside another for loop that loops over multiple datasets: the function would block each time waiting

> for sensor list generation, rather than processing each data set's sensor list generations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for sensor list generation, rather than processing each dataset's sensor list generations
```

  for patch in patch_list:
    sensor_list_future = generate_sensor_list_app(patch)
    sensors_future = process_sensors(sensor_list_future)
    assembled_future = assemble_sensors(sensors_future)
    post_process_futures.append(post_process(assembled_future))

  mosaic_future = make_mosaic(*post_process_futures)
  mosaic_future.result()

  @join_app
  def process_sensors(sensor_list):
    sensor_futures = []
    for sensor in sensor_list:
      sensor_futures.append(process_sensor(sensor))
    return combine(*sensor_futures)

  @python_app
  def combine(*args):
    pass # do nothing, but only after all args are complete

A join_app looks quite like a python app, but should return a future, rather than a value.
After the python code has run, the app invocation will not complete until that future has
completed, and the return value of the `@join_app` will be the return value (or exception)
from the returned future.

This example uses a helper app called `combine` which, given a list of input futures,
completes when all of those futures complete, without any further processing. This constructs a
barrier future, depending on an arbitrary list of other futures.

> This allows more naunced dependencies to be expressed which can help with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows more naunced dependencies to be expressed that can help with:
```

Join Apps
=========

Join apps allows an app to define a sub-workflow: the app can launch other apps
and incorporate them into the main task graph. They can be specified using the
`join_app` decorator.

Usage
-----

> A `join_app` looks quite like a python app, but should return a ``Future``,

Reviewer: do you mean `python_app` instead of python_app?  ie a parsl decorated python app or just a regular python app?

Author: whats a "regular python app"  that isn't parsl decorated?

Reviewer: I meant that maybe this should be "`python_app`" instead of "python app"

rather than a value. After the python code has run, the app invocation will not
complete until that future has completed, and the return value of the `join_app`

> will be the return value (or exception) from the returned future.

Reviewer: say how this is different than a parsl-decorated python_app?

Author: this should be explained now later on in the examples

In the following example, a sub-workflow called ``process`` is defined. This
workflow decides which app to run on its argument, type_one if the input
is positive and type_two if the input is negative.

.. code-block:: python

  @python_app
  def type_one(x):
    # do some stuff
    return x*2

  @python_app
  def type_two(x):
    # do some more stuff
    return (-x) * 2

  @join_app
  def process(x):
    if x > 0:
      return type_one(x)
    else:
      return type_two(x)

  # process(10).result() == 20
  # process(-3).result() = 6

The join app ``process`` looks very much like a normal Python function

> which launches apps would. When invoked with literal numbers as above,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that launches apps. When invoked with literal numbers as above,
```

it would behave as if the `join_app` decorator wasn't there: the literal
number is inspected and a choice is made about which app to invoke;
then the ``Future`` that is returned from ``process`` completes when
processing is finished.

The difference comes when the input ``x`` is to come from the output of
an earlier app invocation:

.. code-block:: python

  @python_app
  def later():
    time.sleep(120)
    return 10

  # process(later()) = 20

If ``process`` was a regular Python function, it would be able to inspect
the result of ``later`` - that result wouldn't exist for another 120 seconds.

A join app would defer its execution until ``later`` was complete, just like

> any other Parsl app that is passed a ``Future``.

Reviewer: again, at this point it's not clear why something different than a python_app is needed

Motivation
----------

Although apps can be launched from within a `python_app` in any `ThreadPoolExecutor`,
the ``Future`` objects from those launched apps cannot easily be used.

Here is a motivating example that shows ways in which launching apps from inside a
`python_app` is insufficient.

Consider a workflow where there are "sensors" which must be processed and assembled
into "patches", and then all patches assembled into a "mosaic".

The list of which sensors must be assembled into which "patches" is not known ahead
of time and is expensive to compute.

There are many patches that must all be processed in this way.

For each patch:

1. Generate list of sensors for this patch, in a single parsl app.
2. Process sensors for this patch - one parsl app per sensor
3. When all sensors are processed, assemble all the processed data into a patch.
4. When assembly is complete, do some post processing on the patch

Once all patches are done:

5. Make mosaic of all patches

> Here are some implementation attempts and the weaknesses I see in them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some possible implementations and their shortcomings.
```

the tasks that it has launched, because it blocks waiting for completion of the post_process step, by
calling post_process_future.result().

It does this so that the process_patch app completes after the post_process step. If this call to
.result() was not there, the process_patch app invocation would complete too early, and make_mosaic
could run before post_process is complete.

Because of this, there can be serialization and deadlock issues: there needs to be one local-thread-pool
worker available for every patch to be processed simultanously, that will for the most part be sitting
idle waiting for final results. If there are fewer workers, then patch processing will be
serialised due to lack of workers, although to a lesser extent than in attempt 1.

But worse, if any of the launched apps also used the same `ThreadPoolExecutor`, then
the workflow can deadlock:
launched process_patch apps will be waiting for other apps to complete, but those apps cannot start
because process_patch apps are occupying all of the `ThreadPoolExecutor` workers.

This leads to a principle: apps should not block on other apps; instead any blocking of execution

> should happen inside parsl's dependency mechanism.

Reviewer: Is this a more general principle than just in these examples? Something that we should use to rethink some of other tutorials examples?

Author: yes. (it was in the parslfest talk on structuring workflows too, i think)

Author: and there's even a userguide chapter on structuring workflows that this could form part of.

    sensors_future = process_sensors(sensor_list_future)
    assembled_future = assemble_sensors(sensors_future)
    post_process_futures.append(post_process(assembled_future))

  mosaic_future = make_mosaic(*post_process_futures)
  mosaic_future.result()

  @join_app
  def process_sensors(sensor_list):
    sensor_futures = []
    for sensor in sensor_list:
      sensor_futures.append(process_sensor(sensor))
    return combine(*sensor_futures)

  @python_app
  def combine(*args):
    pass # do nothing, but only after all args are complete

This example uses a helper app called ``combine`` which, given a list of input futures,
completes when all of those futures complete, without any further processing. This constructs a
barrier future, depending on an arbitrary list of other futures.

This allows more naunced dependencies to be expressed that can help with:

* increased concurrency - helping with strong scaling
* more focused error propagation - allowing more of an ultimately failing workflow to complete
* more useful monitoring information

Terminology
-----------

The term "join" comes from use of monads in functional programming, especially Haskell.

> 

Reviewer: what would happen if we replaced all python_apps by join_apps?  (Or simply changed the implementation of python_app to the implementation of join_app?
